Add documentation about the e2e testing study (#44)
Nordix/airship-clusterapi-docs: e2e/investigation.md

    (CON: it scales poorly and it would cause problems with locally running tests on a developer's machine)

**Option 2 (solve it in CI)**:

    This approach would require minimal modification to the CAPM3 Makefile and
    additional some additional logic to the test code to implement the ability to selectively execute e2e test
    specs (similarly how it is in dev-env integration tests). Option 3 also includes the individually executable tests.

    This approach would basically be implemented by running multiple e2e test jobs in CI that would only test individual e2e
    test cases. (CON: this would still require multiple hosts in CityCloud and it would be still slow on local dev-envs).

**Option3 (GO approach)**:

Ginkgo test specs can be executed in a parallel fashion as described [here](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/#parallel-specs).

    Each individual test case should have it's own cleanup process that reverts the modifications
    done by the test execution.

    The cleanup process should aim to avoid re-installation of the
    dev-env. In some cases like pivoting the cleanup process could be implemented as an other

>     test spec/case e.g "re-pivoting".

Reviewer: Why do we need a cleanup process that reverts the modifications done by the test? With the `sequential` group of tests, a test needs the change from its previous test to run, so reverting is not necessary. With the `parallel` group, since each test in this group runs separately, we also don't need to revert, either.

Author: It is mainly to  help developers reuse the environment when they run tests locally .

    Test specs that are executed in parallel mode should be grouped separately from the ones executed sequentially as
    not all e2e test cases work well together. The tests that are grouped together as parallelly executable would be

>     executed by Ginkgo's native parallel execution feature. The parallelly executed tests would run at the same time

Reviewer: >  The parallelly executed tests would run at the same time in different namespaces on the same developer environment (same management cluster and same managed cluster(s)).

It is true that Ginkgo has this feature, but I wonder if we can make it with our e2e tests because our tests involve actions that even change the underlying infrastructure (changing the working cluster in Pivoting, scale in then sacle out in node-reuse...).

Author: I have answered it under the next question.

    in different namespaces on the same developer environment (same management cluster and same managed cluster(s)).

>     All the test cases should be able run individually e.g "make test-e2e pivoting update" etc...

Reviewer: It is mentioned above that tests should be grouped since they may need to run sequentially. (Pivoting - Repivoting). So how we can make all the test being able to run individually?

Author: This question connected to the previous one so I will answer both here. 
There are multiple things that have to be done.

Both of the questions relate to Option3 that is might be not enough by itself as I described. It might require either option 1 or 2 to be implemented alongside with it in the future.

Answer to your question:

1. We would need to implement an environment variable based selector logic to enable-disable groups of tests, I think these "groups" of tests could even be in different "Describe" blocks. 

2. We need at least 2 separate GO test execution command in the makefile, they could stay under the same "make test-e2e" command. One  would be the sequential execution command and the others would commands that execute the group of tests that could run parallel to each other.

Reviewer: I'm happy with your answer of the question 2. However, there are something that still make me confused regarding the question 1. My concern is that we will hardly find a pair of tests that will not interfere each other if we run them at the same time on the same nodes. Could you explain a bit more about how to avoid this conflict by using different Describe blocks? 

> Both of the questions relate to Option3 that is might be not enough by itself as I described. It might require either option 1 or 2 to be implemented alongside with it in the future.

What do you mean by `not enough`? Does the option 3 not provide the parallel execution as we expect?

Author: Answer for the first question:

- It is true that at the moment we have just a few tests and they are mostly disruptive but it might change in the future and I think the goal is to make a maintainable e2e test process so we have to prepare for the future.
- The use of separate describe blocks is just an additional step, I think it would nicely group tests together so this step by itself would not solve the parallelization. 

Answer for second question:

Option 3 would provide a structure for e2e tests that is maintainable and more controllable from execution point of view. I think option 3 has to be implemented in any case but it would not be enough by itself and I think the answer will be that we have to implement option 2 additionally.

Reviewer: Ok, I see. Thanks for your answer, @Rozzii. Now I have better understanding about this study. More comments will be added. Please check

>     All the test cases should be able run individually e.g "make test-e2e pivoting update" etc...

Reviewer: > All the test cases should be able run individually e.g "make test-e2e pivoting update" etc...

I think not all the test cases, but only the ones in the parallel group

Author: Fore CI it is really not that advantageous, during automated testing it is enough to be able to select between groups of tests but if you run the tests in local environment it would be helpful to be able to select individual tests. In case we only implement group level test selection we can't run individual tests without editing the code but on the other hand if we implement individual selection we can still execute a full group if we want.

    this could be useful in the future when there will be more test cases.

**NOTE**:

	There is the possibility to combine option 3 and 1 such as in case the modifications is done as part of
	option 3 would not yield the needed time savings then the test process could be extended with the use of
	multiple dev-envs and tests could be executed across multiple dev-envs if needed. With this approach
	the test execution would be still handled by ginkgo parallel test approach and it would require a
	"big" virtual machine as a build host. This approach also creates a lot of technical depth and increases
	the complexity of the tests.

## Plan to proceed:

1. All the e2e tests has to be implemented.

> 2. Option3 has to be implemented anyways to have a maintainable test setup.

Reviewer: I think you should add a bit more explanation here. The option 3 alone doesn't speed up the current overall test process because we now cannot find any tests that can be in the parallel group. To meet the goal of this study, we need to implement option 3 **with either option 1 or 2**. However, both options has its own cons as you have pointed out in this study. Therefore, I think more discussion or even investigation is needed to overcome the drawback of the options before jumping to the implementation.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion I will add more explanation .

("specs" in GO nomenclature) and the value of the argument would be a boolean that would be set to false when the test is blocked and true when
the test is selected for execution. `Groups` of tests could even be in different "Describe" blocks
although it would only provide logical separation in the `Ginkgo` code and not actual time savings.

**Benefit**
The implementation of individually executable test cases would provide the functionality to support multiple `Ginkgo` test execution
commands in the Makefile. The different `Ginkgo` test execution commands would execute a single group of tests and the individual tests
that belong to the group would be passed one by one to the `Ginkgo` test commands as command line arguments. The `Ginkgo` commands that
are execute a group of tests could be configured to do parallel execution or sequential execution based on what kind of tests are
present in the group. As a consequence of the aforementioned benefits the developers could selectively execute e2e tests on local
development environments without editing the `Ginkgo` code and also in CI it would be easy to create different jobs for different
groups of tests.

> **Example of the test execution when Option 3 is implemented**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example of the test execution when this feature is implemented**
```
Because you no longer mention to the option 3 in this study.

	-ginkgo.v -ginkgo.trace -ginkgo.progress -ginkgo.noColor=$(GINKGO_NOCOLOR) \
	-e2e.artifacts-folder="$(ARTIFACTS)" \
     -e2e.test_pivot="${TEST_PIVOT}" \
     -e2e.test_repivot="${TEST_REPIVOT}" \
	-e2e.config="$(E2E_CONF_FILE_ENVSUBST)" \
	-e2e.skip-resource-cleanup=$(SKIP_CLEANUP) \
	-e2e.use-existing-cluster=$(SKIP_CREATE_MGMT_CLUSTER)
     # A parallel group
     time go test -v -timeout 24h -tags=e2e ./test/e2e/... -args \
	-ginkgo.p -ginkgo.v -ginkgo.trace -ginkgo.progress -ginkgo.noColor=$(GINKGO_NOCOLOR) \
	-e2e.artifacts-folder="$(ARTIFACTS)" \
     -e2e.test_update="${UPDATE_TARGET_CLUSTER}" \
     -e2e.some_other_test="${SOME_OTHER_TEST}" \
	-e2e.config="$(E2E_CONF_FILE_ENVSUBST)" \
	-e2e.skip-resource-cleanup=$(SKIP_CLEANUP) \
	-e2e.use-existing-cluster=$(SKIP_CREATE_MGMT_CLUSTER)
     .
     .
     .
```

**NOTE**:
    Arbitrary number of sequential and parallel test groups could be defined thus arbitrary number of
    `Gingko` test execution command could be implemented in the `Makefile`.

**NOTE**:
    The creation of a `maintainable and configurable e2e test execution process` would not solve the issue that certain

>     e2e tests take a long tim to complete and can't be executed parallelly with other tests. The test process has to be be extended

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    e2e tests take a long time to complete and can't be executed parallelly with other tests. The test process has to be be extended
```

    during e2e test execution.

### Options to speed up e2e tests

**Option 1 for time saving (pool of dev-envs)**:

**IDEA**
This solution requires the bootstrapping of separate dev-env instances
(both management cluster and target cluster) for individual e2e test cases.
With this approach the test execution would be still handled by `Ginkgo` parallel
test approach.

**CON**
This approach would require a "large" virtual machine as a build host thus it scales
poorly when new tests are added. This approach also creates a lot of technical depth and increases
the complexity of the tests as multiple separate dev-envs has to be setup and `Ginkgo` has to manage tests
paralelly on the separate dev-envs. There is a real possibility that the hardware requirements would be simply
to heavy to use this approach on local developer machines.

**Option 2 for time saving (solve it in CI)**:

**IDEA**
There would be individual CI jobs created for executing different set of the E2E test groups. There is no
need to create the same number of jobs as the number of test jobs as e.g. on test job could execute a test group

> that takes 30 minutes while an other could execute 2 groups that take 15 minutes individually. This approach wouldn't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that takes 30 minutes while another could execute 2 groups that take 15 minutes individually. This approach wouldn't
```

> # Study of end-to-end  testing of CAPM3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Study of end-to-end testing of CAPM3
```

    The cleanup process should aim to avoid re-installation of the
    dev-env. In some cases like pivoting the cleanup process could be implemented as an other
    test spec/case e.g "re-pivoting".

    Test specs that are executed in parallel mode should be grouped separately from the ones executed sequentially as
    not all e2e test cases work well together. Alternatively tests specs could be synced but
    that could add considerable cognitive burden when there are a lot of tests.

    All the test cases should be able run individually e.g "make test-e2e pivoting update" etc...
    this could be useful in the future when there will be more test cases.

**NOTE**:

	There is the possibility to combine option 3 and 1 such as in case the modifications is done as part of
	option 3 would not yield the needed time savings then the test process could be extended with the use of
	multiple dev-envs and tests could be executed across multiple dev-envs if needed. With this approach
	the test execution would be still handled by ginkgo parallel test approach and it would require a
	"big" virtual machine as a build host. This approach also creates a lot of technical depth and increases

> 	the complexity of the tests. CAPO does something similar to this.

Reviewer 2: What about running the tests in different Kubernetes namespaces, instead of in different dev envs? That's what CAPO does. Each CAPI cluster is in a different namespace of the management cluster, and each Gingko `Describe` block runs in parallel (2 at a time) spinning up a machine + cluster from the same source k8s. See: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-openstack/blob/5e92c921936140cdfaa870b10bc7a1d6f2c0b91e/test/e2e/shared/common.go#L41. 

Here you seem to be suggesting different that the tests run in different metal3-dev-envs, but did you consider using a single dev env with multiple namespaces in the management cluster? (A large machine would still be required for the pool of VMs.)

Author: Yes I have considered it, there are always certain tests that can be run in a parallel manner next to each other, but there are disruptive ones like pivot, repivot, upgrade that I think would cause instability for other tests. 

But running test parallell in different namespace is perfectly fine and this is  the reason why I mentioned this:

" Test specs that are executed in parallel mode should be grouped separately from the ones executed sequentially as not all e2e test cases work well together. Alternatively tests specs could be synced but that could add considerable cognitive burden when there are a lot of tests."
    
  But I think you are right It could be explained better. I will rewrite it a bit with this in mind. I think I can highlight that the parallel execution would be in separate namespaces on the same dev-env.

Reviewer 2: I think upgrade would probably be OK, since the target nodes will live in their own namespace, but pivot and repivot would definitely require some thought.
